# Mobile Exploration

(I want to note this was written before Ionic2 and Angular2 which have made the performance issues a thing of the past. Also I was basing my Ionic Android performance ratings solely on emulators - major mistake, performs much better on a physical device)

This project contains a few very simple applications so that I could get a little familiarity with the different options available in mobile development.

Included is an Android and iOS app written in react native, the ionic framework, and 100% native code. I found some pros and cons in the development experience for each of the options and am going to discuss those here.

# Native

For the very simple applications I threw together for this little project I ran into almost no problems developing these apps completely native. The biggest bottleneck I experienced here was getting my dev environment set up properly to run both android studio and emulate an android device (in the end I decided to ditch android studio emulators altogether, even after utilizing intel haxm, because of the load times and instead used genymotion for emulation). I am programming on a Mac so iOS development was as straightforward as booting up xCode and hitting play. Once I had my dev environment set up I created a sample project in each IDE using one of the sample templates given.

<h4>iOS (to run this open the folder native_iOS in xCode and press run)</h4>

I chose to use Swift rather than the objective-c language for this project because Swift is modern and open source and I hope to never add something to the overwhelming sea of bad legacy code. This was my first ever forray into Swift and iOS development so I was a bit off-put when I first opened up the project and began to poke around but after only 5 minutes or so I was feeling very at home in the code and started making my own hacks. I wanted to get all of these projects up and running in a day so I didn't go to crazy or add any fancy features, just some basic paging that dynamically displays the users current page and some static text that persists across each screen (painstakingly simple really). After this brief intro my conclusion would be that native iOS development would be an enjoyable experience but for me there would definitely be an initial learning curve. I would first have to familiarize myself with the syntax of Swift, also I have seen some sample protocol oriented programming code and I love the idea and portability potential I saw so I would have to explore that architecture further as well. Then after learning the specifics of the language and teaching myself to think in protocols (a welcome change I believe, I'm not a huge fan of classical oo inheritance, too messy) I could finally dig in and learn the specifics of iOS views, gesture control, precise touch responsiveness, etc........... (yea a whole lot to learn). While this may seem like a lot at first but given the documentation and huge amount of resources available onine for iOS I think the overall experience would be pretty painless. Needless to say but I'll mention it just for the sake of completeness, performance of this simple native app was flawless in the emulator.

<h4>Android (to run this open the folder nativeAndroid in Android Studio and press run)</h4>

Other than the pain of setting up my Android dev environment on Mac (including setting environment vars and learning all of the reasons to hate emulating android) this was probably the simplest project to get up and running. I had recently done a fair amount of work on a Java Spring application and that translated well to Android because much of the workflow is very similar, java code supported by xml configuration. If I were to dig deeper into Android I would of course have to become much more familiar with the different view technologies offered by the SDK and dig into what makes a great Android UX and how to make everything as seamless as possible. Again another learning curve here to really get going but there is a very large community here as well and together they have submitted a ton of useful examples and best practices I could draw from to ramp up as quickly as possible. Again this being a natively written app, and extremely simple, the performance even on the android emulator was perfect.

# React Native (to run navigate to the reactNative dir and run react-native run-ios or react-native run-android)

Prior to taking React Native for this test drive I had read a solid chunk of plain React's documentation and watched a number of videos from the 2015 ReactJS conference so I had a little exposure to the technology and how it worked but had yet to write any of my own code using the framework. I ran into a few hiccups along the way with this one, the worst and most frustrating actually being due to an android emulator (who would have guessed?!?!) not running the app due to insufficient storage even though I set it up to run with 5GB of internal memory. This is when I decided to ditch the stock android emulators and use genymotion instead. Besides that pain point I did run into some trouble when I went to modify the original example code I took from react-native's github page to get me started, in the end it was a simple syntax difference in how they were creating the example react components and the more standard method I observed in their other online examples. Once I had that figured out it was pretty straightforward to edit their example app so I decided to expand upon it and try to implement a native iOS UI element using react-native. This is the point where things got a little hairy and I discovered that if you want to build a full featured app in react-native you are also going to have to learn quite a bit about how to build a mobile app natively as well. React Native acts like a wrapper to some of the most common of iOS and Android's UI elements but if you need to extend or customize the functionality of these element you're going to have to dig into the native code yourself and get your hands dirty, luckily react-native is 100% open source so there is nothing stopping you from morphing the code however you would like to fit your needs. Another note about react-native is that it will not save you from having to write two apps (one for iOS one for Android) however it could make that process similar and there is potential to share code across the two platforms. However, unlike frameworks such as Ionic where you run only write code once and it runs on both Android and iOS simulatneously due to the power of Cordova, in react-native you will have a folder containing a full set of iOS react components and another folder containing your Android react components. You will then wire these components up in an index.ios/android.js file and that will serve as the entry point of your application. With react-native there is a lot of code to write (very explicit framework, I think that's a positive aspect) but at least with my simple apps the performance on both iOS and Android was excellent and I could detect no difference from a 100% natively written application.

# Ionic (to run navigate to the ionic dir and run ionic emulate ios or ionic emulate android)

This was by far the simplest of all the projects I did. Developing an ionic app feels no different than developing an Angular web application for the browser and ionic provides an excellent getting started package that allows any web developer with Angular experience (Angular also happens to be very easy to learn) to get started building there own mobile app in minutes. Ionic has by far the smallest learning curve compared to the other technologies I've discussed but this comes with a major drawback, Ionic performs horribly on Android. When I say horribly I mean completely unusable, I used multiple emulators to host the application and the simple task of changing tabs was enough to cause a 2 second delay in the application. On the other hand for my very simple app Ionic performed extremely well on iOS. So while I would be a bit hesitant myself about how Ionic would scale for iOS for larger applications it could be a great choice for iOS development but please don't waste your time trying to build an Ionic Android application.

# Conclusion

If I were to build a mobile app tomorrow I would without question stick with 100% native development, at least for the time being I don't think these other frameworks are bringing enough to the table to mix in their unnecessary inherent complexity. Ionic while extremely simple to get started with would suffer from all the same problems of other large scale angular applications (most notably a very complex component dependency hierarchy) and is flat out not a legitimate option for Android. While I love the explicitness and structure of React components I just don't think the react-native framework is built out enough yet to be useful enough to justify the added code complexity for your mobile app. Perhaps once the app is built out in a native way it could be refactored into react components to take advantage of the superior maintainability they offer developers but I would only want the extra headache of extending a framework after I had a full understanding of the underlying native UI elements. Also, since I have never seen a large scale mobile app built in react-native I can not comment on its performance but judging from its capabilities in the browser I would venture that scalability is the least of its' concerns.
